--- PAGE 1 ---
2023
EDUCATOR’S
PACKET
TRAVELING EXHIBITION
Smithsonian Aﬃliate

--- PAGE 2 ---
2
MUSEUM OF LATIN AMERICAN ART - BOTERO EDUCATOR PACKET | 2023 
www.molaa.org
CONTENTS
PAGE
TOPIC
 3
OBJECTIVE/ BACKGROUND
 4
KEY TERMS/VOCABULARY
 5
VISUAL THINKING STRATEGIES - SLOW THINKING 
IN THE MUSEUM
 6-7
 8-9
VTS/INTERPRETATION #1 - GALLERY GAME
VTS/INTERPRETATION #2 - FLASH MEMORY
10-11
LESSON: LEARN PAPER MACHE WIRE SCULPTURES 
(6-12TH GRADE)
12-13
ACTIVITY: HOME STUDIO - FAMILY PORTRAITS
14
ACTIVITY: YOUR ARTIST TIMELINE
15
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
16
FERNANDO BOTERO TIMELINE

--- PAGE 3 ---
3
MUSEUM OF LATIN AMERICAN ART - BOTERO EDUCATOR PACKET | 2023 
www.molaa.org
Hello! This packet will provide you with tools and resources to teach your children or students about the Master, 
Fernando Botero. In this guide you will find vocabulary terms that highlight elements of art, themes and subject matter 
all relating to the works in the exhibition. You will also find Visual Thinking Strategies developed by our team to help 
you facilitate conversations between students and adults.
We have included art lessons and activities to practice in the classroom or at home.
	
	
	
	
- MOLAA Education Team, 2023
OBJECTIVE / BACKGROUND

--- PAGE 4 ---
4
MUSEUM OF LATIN AMERICAN ART - BOTERO EDUCATOR PACKET | 2023 
www.molaa.org
VOCABULARY / KEY TERMS 
1. Boterismo: The signature style used by the Master Fernando Botero, depicting people and figures in large, 
exaggerated volumes, which has been used to represent political criticism or humor depending on the piece.  
2. Figurative Art: Any form of art that strongly references the real world, particularly the human figure. The Master, 
Fernando Botero, particularly focuses painting real people rather than abstract shapes or colors.
3. Mexican Muralism:  A Mexican art movement that focused on large scale public artwork centered around 
themes of Mexican identity and social/political engagement from the1920s and 1930s. This movement was led 
by Los Tres Grandes; Diego Rivera, David Alfaro Siqueiros, and Jose Clemente Orozco. The social themes and 
representations of perspective found in the murals by these artists greatly influenced Botero in the 1950s, leading to 
the birth of his work “Still Life with Mandolin” in 1956.
4. Symbolism: A technique used by artists to represent meaning beyond the picture that is drawn. Works of art 
can be given meaning or be used as a metaphor through subjects like fruit, heroes, flowers, animals, women, and 
landscapes. Still Life paintings with an abundance of objects can be used to represent wealth while paintings of 
wilted flowers may represent the passing of time. 
5. Voluminous:  A term used to describe a figure or form exhibiting great volume or bulk. This term can be used to 
describe the exaggerated and rounded paintings and sculptures produced by the Master, Fernando Botero.
6. Form: An element of art, always having three dimensions: length, width, and height.
 7. Still Life: A work of art that shows inanimate objects from the natural or man-made world, such as fruits, flowers, 
baskets or bowls, arranged in a particular way by an artist. This genre of painting is universal and has survived over 
thousands of years, the earliest still life paintings of fruit can be traced to Egypt in the15th century BCE. 
8. Bronze Cast Sculpture: The process of pouring molten bronze into a hollow mold to create a positive bronze 
sculpture or object. Botero employs this artistic process to create massive, rounded figures such as “Reclining 
Woman.”
9. Nude Figure: A form of visual art that focuses on the unclothed human figure. Unclothed figures in art history 
possess a confidence, balance, and celebrates human form. This subject matter is universal and can found in the most 
ancient of art forms such as sculpture and painting. 
10. Renaissance Art: Painting, sculpture, architecture, music, and literature that was produced during the 14th-16th 
century in Europe. The art produced during this era showed interest in nature, humanism, and the socio-economic 
changes in society. Works by Masters of the Renaissance Era, like da Vinci and Paolo Uccello influenced Botero 
thematically, as he created portraits of notable figures, families, and government officials in Colombia.  
11. Vallenato: A popular folk music genre from Colombia and a name that translates as “from the valley.” Many of 
the of the musical themes revolve around romance, humility, and travel and was traditionally considered a musical 
genre of the working class. Today, it is popular across Latin America and is listed under the Intangible Heritage List 
by UNESCO. 
12. Lithograph: A print created through Lithography, a print-making process that takes drawing on limestone with 
wax crayons, applying ink onto the stone and pressing the image onto paper or a surface.

--- PAGE 5 ---
5
MUSEUM OF LATIN AMERICAN ART - BOTERO EDUCATOR PACKET | 2023 
www.molaa.org
VISUAL THINKING STRATEGIES/ INTERPRETATION TECHNIQUES
What is museum interpretation? “Interpretation” refers to a range of texts, methods, and ideas used in museums 
to interact with and teach the public about exhibitions and objects. Wall text, guided tours, and even educational 
workshops are considered forms of museum interpretation.
VTS, or Visual Thinking Strategies, is a participant-centered interpretation method used to facilitate conversation. 
VTS promotes deep observation, critical thinking, and making connections between the piece or exhibition and the 
participants. VTS can be used to lead inquiry sessions and conversations that center around the observations of the 
participants. The foundation of VTS lies with three questions that facilitator can ask:
1.	
What do you think is going on in this artwork?
2.	
What details do you see or experience that makes you say that?
3.	
What more can we find?
Although VTS is meant to get a conversation going, you may have a group that is shy or may not want to answer. 
That’s okay! You will usually get at least one or two people who participate, but it’s important to remember that 
even though many of your participants are not answering your questions out loud, they are probably answering the 
questions to themselves—they are still engaged with your interpretation.
Close Looking refers to spending time looking more deeply into an art piece and seeing things the learner would 
have otherwise missed. Spending time looking at one object, asking the participants what details they notice, and 
allowing them the time to notice more about it will make for a much more memorable and meaningful experience 
with the work.
If you have a big idea you want to embody or a goal for the participants, that’s okay! You can throw in questions 
that will help them reach that goal. For example, instead of asking “what do you notice,” you can ask more guiding 
questions like “what colors do you notice?” or “who do you think these people might be?”
If you feel like your VTS method is not fostering enough participation with younger audiences, you can always 
simplify your questions to things that are obvious and offer an example. For instance: “What color do we see here? 
I see some red!” or “How many people can we count in this painting? I see four – do you see more?”

--- PAGE 6 ---
6
MUSEUM OF LATIN AMERICAN ART - BOTERO EDUCATOR PACKET | 2023 
www.molaa.org
Fernando Botero (Colombia, 1932)
Family in the Plantation, 2020
Oil on canvas
70.8 x 63 inches
Private Collection of the Botero Family
VTS/INTERPRETATION TECHNIQUE #1 - Gallery Game
Let’s take a few seconds to just look at this piece before we talk about it.
What do you notice?
What colors to you see? Why do you think the artist chose these colors?
How many people can you find in this painting?
Can you find figures or objects in this painting that are not a person?
Who do you think these people might be? What do you think they are doing? 
Why are they dressed the way they are?
Where do you think they are? What time do you think they’re from?
Are any of them looking at us? Are any of them looking away? Why?

--- PAGE 7 ---
7
MUSEUM OF LATIN AMERICAN ART - BOTERO EDUCATOR PACKET | 2023 
www.molaa.org
GALLERY GAMES
Gallery Games are fun, participatory activities that you can engage your audience with as you interpret. If you 
feel like your group is not interested or they aren’t participating, gallery games can be a good way to increase 
participation. Here are a few examples:
•Ask them to use their senses: You can ask your group questions that relate to their senses like…
o	 How would you describe the weather in this painting? Is it cold? Hot?
o	 Is there anything in this artwork that would have a taste or smell? What might it smell like?
o	 What do you think this object in this painting might feel like? Is it smooth? Is it heavy?
o	 If you were in this place at this moment, what sort of things would you hear?
•Test their memories: You can ask the group to study the art piece for 30 seconds (or more if time allows) then 
have them all turn around so that they are facing away from the artwork. While they are facing away, ask them 
to start naming things they noticed. You can even ask guiding questions like “how many ___ did you notice in the 
painting?” or “what colors did you notice?”—this activity usually gets the group thinking when others name things 
they missed. Have them turn back around and find the elements in the piece that others noticed but they did not. This 
is a good way to talk about detail in art.
•Beginning, middle, or end: You can ask your students to think about what is going on in the painting. Ask if 
they think this moment in time was captured at the beginning of something, in the middle of something, or at the 
end of something. When there’s an agreement, it’s a good time to ask hypothetical questions about what led to it or 
followed. For example, if the group begins that it portrays the middle of something, you can ask what happened in 
the beginning or at the end that we can’t see? OR, if it’s decided that the work portrays the beginning of something, 
we can ask what will happen in the middle and the end.

--- PAGE 8 ---
8
MUSEUM OF LATIN AMERICAN ART - BOTERO EDUCATOR PACKET | 2023 
www.molaa.org
VTS/INTERPRETATION TECHNIQUE #2 - Flash Memory
Everyone, study this painting for 30 seconds. Just looking.
Now, everyone, turn around so your back is to the painting
*They can close their eyes instead if turning around is physically challenging for anyone
Can you name any foods you just saw in the painting?
What are some things you saw that are not food?
How many pieces of fruit do you think there were in the painting?
Can anyone tell me what was in the background?
Okay, everyone turn back around (or open your eyes).
How long do you think this food has been out? Is it fresh? Has it been sitting out for a while?
Why do you think so?
What kind of cake do you think that is? What does it smell like? What does it taste like?
Do you think that orange is juicy or dry?
Fernando Botero (Colombia, 1932)
Still Life with Watermelon, 1973
Oil on canvas
68.6 x 74.6 inches
Private Collection of the Botero Family

--- PAGE 9 ---
9
MUSEUM OF LATIN AMERICAN ART - BOTERO EDUCATOR PACKET | 2023 
www.molaa.org
GALLERY GAMES
How you act sets the tone for your tour and has an impact on your group’s comfort level. Things like making eye 
contact, showing that you are listening when someone participates, and being enthusiastic are necessities for 
fostering participation and leading an engaging conversation. Things like crossing our arms or looking away while a 
participant is speaking are examples of body language that can alienate your participants. Another very important 
thing to consider is the vocabulary you use. Make sure you don’t only use advanced or extravagant language with 
your group (unless you have an advanced art class or another group that already knows these terms)—we want 
educational spaces to be accessible to everyone regardless of their education status or vocabulary. Try to make sure 
your verbal language and your body language presents with acceptance and approachability.
References:
Visual Thinking Strategies | Daum Museum of Contemporary Art
Introduction: Close looking and approaches to art – Smarthistory

--- PAGE 10 ---
10
MUSEUM OF LATIN AMERICAN ART - BOTERO EDUCATOR PACKET | 2023 
www.molaa.org
BOTERO IN THE CLASSROOM AND HOME
Art Lessons 
  
Lesson: PAPER MACHE WIRE SCULPTURE 
Grades: 6th – 12th 
Time Required:	
Lesson, (45 - 60 minutes) 
Fernando Botero
Horse / Caballo, 2006 
Bronze with brown patina 
36 ¼ x 39 ¾ x 24 ⅜ inches / pulgadas
Private Collection
Lesson Overview
In the exhibition “The Master: Fernando Botero” students will be exposed to work of art containing figures in 
exaggerated proportions and scale. This lesson is aimed at teaching students about the elements of design such as 
form, proportion, and volume. Students will learn about these elements through the exploration of the human form 
and accessible sculptural materials such as wire, pliers, paper, and glue. 
Learning Objectives
Students will be able to:
•	
Learn about Boterismo, Fernando Botero’s signature style of representing figures.
•	
Understand proportion and scale through the observation of figures. 
•	
Manipulate flexible 2–3-dimensional materials to create full sculptures in the round. 
•	
Create and personalize their own paper Mache sculpture. 
Materials
•	
Spool of wire, 1mm-8mm gauge  
•	
Crepe/tissue paper or newspaper sheets  
•	
Paint brushes 
•	
Pliers 
•	
Scissors 
•	
Masking Tape 
•	
Tempera paint 
•	
Gluestick or liquid glue 
•	
Cardboard 
•	
Optional: Pencil, sheet of scratch paper 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
11
MUSEUM OF LATIN AMERICAN ART - BOTERO EDUCATOR PACKET | 2023 
www.molaa.org
1. Distribute materials 
2. Explain to students that they will be creating their own 3-Dimensional figures using sculptural materials. They will 
begin choosing to create a human figure or object from nature such as a fruit or animal. 
3. Students may choose to draw out their figures from memory or can collaborate with a partner by asking them to 
quickly pose. 
4. Students will begin by creating a silhouette outline of their figure then begin analyzing the geometric forms within 
their subjects. 
Questions to ask 
•	
 What forms can be extracted from the human figure?  
•	
 What forms are our heads shaped in? 
•	
 What shapes resemble our legs and torso? 
•	
 How many shapes can you make out from this figure?
5. Once students have sketched a draft of their figure, they can begin creating their 3-Dimensional wire frames by 
measuring and cutting the aluminum wire with their pliers.
 
•	
Explain to students that the scale and size of their figures can be determined through experimenting 	
		
with various wire lengths. 
6. Measure out 3ft of wire and cut with scissors or pliers. Twist the ends together with pliers and begin to shape to the 
figure based on your sketch.
 
7. Cut and tie strips of wire to the frame according to the form of the figure, this will add dimension and volume.
 
•	
Explore the changes in proportion and dimension in this step by using different sized wire lengths 	
		
and shaping them into different forms. 
8. Optional: You may cut and roll strips of tape into a ball and tape them along the wire frame to create a fuller 
figure. 
9. Cut and wrap strips of different colored crepe paper or newspaper onto the surface of your form. Use glue and a 
paintbrush to seal the paper around your frame. Set aside to dry. 
10. Attach the base of your figure to a piece of cardboard with tape or wire.
 
11. For grades 4-8th, you may add paint to personalize your figures, you can add detailed facial features, hair, 
garments, or accessories. 
Assessment: 
	
•	
Students will discuss their works of art, describing the form of their figure or who or what they chose to 	
	
	
sculpt.  
	
•	
Discuss the relationship between length and depth to create dimension. 
LESSON STEPS

--- PAGE 12 ---
12
MUSEUM OF LATIN AMERICAN ART - BOTERO EDUCATOR PACKET | 2023 
www.molaa.org
ACTIVITIES FOR HOME  
Home Studio – Family Portraits
 
Portraits are works of art that can tell us how someone looks like, what they like or special characteristics about their 
personalities, or can tell us about an activity someone is doing. 
How many members of the family are in La Familia by Fernando Botero? 
Partner up with a friend of family member. You will each create a portrait of yourself and another of your family.
 
What special qualities about you or your family can you include? How can you show these unique ideas in your 
drawing? 
Once you are finished, exchange your portraits. What can you share about the people you drew? Are there any 
similarities or differences? 
Use the boxes in the following page illustrate your personal and family portraits
 
Fernando Botero (Colombia, 1932)
La Familia / The Family, 1992 
Charcoal on canvas 
52 x 39 ½ in. 
MOLAA Permanent Collection, Gift of the Estate of Estelle Soicher

--- PAGE 13 ---
13
MUSEUM OF LATIN AMERICAN ART - BOTERO EDUCATOR PACKET | 2023 
www.molaa.org
SELF PORTRAIT AND FAMILY PORTRAIT
Self Portrait #1
Self Portrait #2
Family Portrait #1
Family Portrait #2

--- PAGE 14 ---
14
MUSEUM OF LATIN AMERICAN ART - BOTERO EDUCATOR PACKET | 2023 
www.molaa.org
HOME STUDIO – ARTIST TIMELINE 
Fernando Botero began his artistic career at the young age of 14 years. Over the course of his 91 years, he has 
created works that reflect his personal experiences, symbols, and major events in the world. 
Timelines can help us keep records of major events in our lives or in the world. 
Create your own timeline using the template below. What are some important dates in your life? What symbols can 
you add to represent important events? (like birthdays or first day of school)
My Timeline:
HOME STUDIO – ARTIST TIMELINE 

--- PAGE 15 ---
15
MUSEUM OF LATIN AMERICAN ART - BOTERO EDUCATOR PACKET | 2023 
www.molaa.org
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
For additional information and assistance with Visual Thinking Strategies, please visit 
Project Zero Harvard Graduate School of Education: 
http://www.pz.harvard.edu/projects/visible-thinking 
Map of Colombia

--- PAGE 16 ---
16
MUSEUM OF LATIN AMERICAN ART - BOTERO EDUCATOR PACKET | 2023 
www.molaa.org
April 19, 1932
Botero is born in what was once the small town of Medellin, Colombia. He is raised in a working-class home. His father was a salesman and 
his mother worked as a seamstress. 
1944-48 
Botero experiences the loss of his father at an early age and is enrolled into bullfighting school by his uncle. At just 16 years old, he becomes 
an illustrator for El Colombiano, one of Medellin’s most popular newspapers. Three years later had his first solo exhibition in Bogota. 
1952
At 20 years old, Botero moves to Bogota after studying in Madrid, Spain and has his first solo show at the Leo Matiz Gallery. Influenced by 
the themes in Mexican muralism, his paintings begin to portray the deadly realities of La Violencia, a ten-year civil war period between the 
Colombian conservative and liberal parties. 
1953-1956 
Botero moves to Paris, France and makes a living by selling works outside of the Louvre Museum. He moves to Florence, Italy where he studies 
the mediums of the European masters, like Giotto and Michelangelo, and works in the Renaissance tradition. He returns to Bogota with 20 of 
the works he created in Italy, but he receives negative criticism and returns to illustration. 
1956-1966
Over the next decade, the artist is met with positive feedback. He continues to move between Europe, Latin America, and the U.S. In Mexico 
City, he begins to develop his own unique style of exaggerated volume of forms later coined as Boterismo and creates Still Life with Mandolin. 
His tribute to DaVinci, Mona Lisa, age 12, is acquired and exhibited at the MoMA while living in New York. He is appointed professor of 
Painting at the Academy of Fine Arts at the National University of Bogota, affirming him as one of the most important new Colombian painters. 
1967 
Botero spends time interpreting other works, including those of Albrecht Dürer and Édouard Manet, in his own style. 
1973-1979 
Botero experiences both incredible success and terrible loss throughout the following years. He and his family are involved in a tragic car 
accident where his four-year-old son, Pedro, passes away. While working through the injuries and mourning of his son, he begins to create his 
first sculptures and is awarded by Venezuelan and Colombian governments. 
1980-1996
The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York acquires his piece Dancing in Colombia, and illustrations of La Corrida are exhibited at the 
Tamayo Museum in Mexico and the Los Angeles Art Show. Botero’s paintings and sculptures gain global recognition, and his works are 
exhibited in Denmark, Italy, Türkiye, Russia, Japan, and Puerto Rico. In Medellin, a public bronze sculpture of a dove donated by the artist is 
bombed in a terrorist attack. In the spirit of peace, Botero donates an exact replica. 
2000-2009
At the turn of the new millennium, Botero donates his private collection of works he had compiled over a fifty-year span. In 2004, the 
Marlborough Gallery in New York showcases a series of paintings inspired by the harsh conditions endured by prisoners in Abu Ghraib in 
Iraq. His legacy and vast contributions to Latin American art are awarded by various universities and institutions across Mexico and the United 
States. He even becomes an honorary citizen in his resident town of Pietrasanta, Italy. 
2012-2017
In 2012, national museums and galleries across the globe stage retrospective exhibitions to celebrate the artist’s 80th birthday. Boterismo 
makes its way East as nine monumental sculptures, a series of Baroque-inspired paintings, and illustrations reflecting Colombian society, 
bullfighters, and still-life are exhibited at the National Museum of China in Beijing and at Hong Kong’s Central Harbourfront. 
2020-2022
Botero currently lives and works between Paris, Monte Carlo, Pietrasanta, and New York. In 2022, in collaboration with the Desert Botanical 
Gardens in Phoenix, AZ, the Museum of Latin American Art (MOLAA) premiers the exhibition, Fernando Botero: The Master including 
monumental works like Reclining Woman. Botero is given LEGADO: Legacy in the Arts honors at the MOLAA Annual Gala in celebration of 
his 90th birthday and lasting contributions to modern and contemporary Latin American art. 
FERNANDO BOTERO TIMELINE

